FRA Notes

The effects of the Food Reserve Agency on maize market prices in Zambia
Mason, Myers 2013

 In low-harvest years, FRA often imports maize and sells it to select large-scale millers at below-market prices.
 
 
simulations show that FRA activities stabilized market prices throughout the July 1996–December 2008 study period and raised mean prices between July 2003 and December 2008 by 17–19%. 

 had  a stabilizing effect on market prices and reduced market price levels during the early 1990s  Chapoto and Jayne (2009).
 
 
 They find no significant effect of lagged FRA  purchases but significant negative effects of lagged FRA sales on maize prices.
 
 
The FRA was established by GRZ in 1996 and its original mandate was to establish and administer a national food reserve stimate the impacts of the FRA’s pricing decisions 

The level and variability of these simulated prices are compared to those of the realized historical prices to determine the effects of the FRA on maize market price whereas FRA purchases are fairly well distributed throughout Zambia (NCPB, n.d.; Table 1).

by testing for threshold nonlinearities in the effects of the FRA on
maize market prices  FRA purchases dropped considerably in 2008/2009 and 2009/2010 before shooting to nearly 900,000 MT in 2010/2011 following a maize bumper harvest announced in May (the beginning of the harvest season). 

In most years, FRA maize purchases commence in June or July and conclude at the end of September or October. 

Much of the maize purchased by the FRA is channeled to large industrial millers and trading firms. 

In addition to the maize marketing activities of the FRA, the GRZ uses a number of other policy tools to influence maize markets and prices. 

(i) explicit export bans and implicit export bans through limited issuance of export licenses; 

(ii) adjusting import tariff rates;

(iii) government-arranged maize imports and sales of subsidized maize to large industrial millers;

(iv) levies on the interdistrict movement of maize; 

(v) targeted fertilizer subsidies (Govereh et al., 2008).

Much of the maize purchased by the FRA is channeled to large industrial millers and trading firms. 

Most FRA maize sales occur during the hungry season months of December through March and are done via a tender process

 it sometimes sells maize on the domestic market at below-market prices. 
 
 In most years, however, the weighted average FRA sell price exceeded average wholesale prices throughout Zambia

The use of structural VAR “SEMs are most useful when substantial certainty exists regarding the true economic structure generating data.
Second, very little data are available on quantities of maize stored and consumed, and on prices at different levels in the maize value

A linear structural VAR of the dynamic relationships between p t and y t can be written as m lag length for variables in the system,
structural error terms (vyt ) to their estimated historical values, recursively constructing the policy innovations (vpt ) to obtain
the desired alternative policy scenario, and then constructing dynamic forecasts for the market variables

 The es-timated VAR can also be used to conduct impulse response analysis, which shows the dynamic response of a given market variable 
 to a one-time random shock to one of the policy variables, holding other shocks fixed.
 
The VARs in this article are estimated under the assumption of stationarity. 

Full sample unit root test results generally support this assumption for four of the six endogenous variables in the Zambia/FRA VAR (see Table B1 in Appendix B).

However, these tests are known to have low power, particularly in the presence of nonlinearities. 

Moreover, if there are unit roots (and potentially cointegration), OLS estimates of the VAR parameters are still consistent, though not efficien
 buy price premium (BPP, the FRA buy price minus the wholesale price in the major maize production area, Choma);
 
(ii) the FRA sell price premium (SPP, the weighted average  FRA sell price minus the wholesale price in the major maize consumption area, Lusaka); 

and (iii) net FRA maize purchases (FRA domestic purchases minus domestic sales). 

Cholesky decomposition, the most
commonly used identification scheme in structural VAR model 


In the absence of a public MIS, some farmers and traders may establish private market information networks and share information over mobile phones.

2. Smallholder Supply Response to Marketing Board Activities in a Dual Channel Marketing System: The Case of Zambia

Mason, Jayne and Myers 

Results suggest that increases in the farmgate FRA maize price raise farmer 

maize price expectations, which induces a supply response  a 1% increase in the FRA price is associated with 0.06% increases in smallholders’ maize area planted and quantity harvested.
